A20-binding inhibitors of NF-kappaB
ABIN-1, ABIN-2 and ABIN-3 (also known as TNIP-1, TNIP-2, and TNIP-3) were identified as ubiquitously expressed A20 interacting proteins and were shown to inhibit NF-kappaB activation by TNF and several other inflammatory stimuli upon overexpression. Because ABINs contain a specific ubiquitin-binding motif, they have been proposed to target A20 to polyubiquitinated substrates [43,44]. Similar to A20, ABIN-1 and ABIN-3 expression is NF-kappaB dependent, implicating a potential role for the A20/ABIN complex in the negative feedback regulation of NF-kappaB activation (reviewed in [54]). Unexpectedly, both ABIN-1-deficient and ABIN-2-deficient mice exhibit only slightly increased or normal NF-kappaB responses, respectively, possibly reflecting redundant NF-kappaB inhibitory activities of multiple ABINs [55,56]. Functional ABIN-3 is expressed in humans, but mice only express a truncated and inactive form lacking the crucial ubiquitin-binding domain [57]. As for A20, ABIN-1 also strongly inhibits TNF-induced apoptosis [58], and ABIN-1 deficient mice die embryonically due to TNF-dependent foetal liver apoptosis [56].
Using oligonucleotide microarray analysis, ABIN-1 was identified among TNF-induced genes in human synoviocytes, and high levels of ABIN-1 mRNA were detected in RA tissue biopsies, indicating a potential role for ABIN-1, together with A20, in the negative feedback regulation of NF-kappaB signalling and the pathogenesis of RA [59]. In a recent study, inhibition of TLR responses by immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-coupled receptors was shown to depend on the expression of the NF-kappaB inhibitory proteins ABIN-3 and A20. Moreover, this protective effect of the ITAM was strongly suppressed in inflammatory arthritis synovial macrophages [60]. Interestingly, ABIN-1 polymorphisms have been associated with psoriasis and systemic lupus erythematosus in humans [61,62]. A high degree of overlap between systemic lupus erythematosus and RA susceptibility loci might be expected as the two diseases show some clinical overlap in joint involvement, autoantibody production, systemic features and response to treatments such as B-cell depletion (rituximab). It will therefore be interesting to investigate whether SNPs that have been reported to be associated with systemic lupus erythematosus are also associated with RA.