Since NF-kappaB activation is so crucial to many cellular processes, a tight regulation of the NF-kappaB signalling pathway and the genes it induces is an absolute requirement to fine-tune the inflammatory response. Moreover, terminating an NF-kappaB response is essential to prevent persistent NF-kappaB activation that may lead to chronic inflammation and/or tumorigenesis. To achieve this, cells employ different mechanisms, including the expression of inhibitory proteins that downregulate NF-kappaB signalling [32]. Below we give an overview of a number of proteins that are involved in the dampening or termination of the NF-kappaB response, some of them under the control of NF-kappaB itself and thus acting in a negative feedback loop. In addition, we discuss the potential role of these NF-kappaB inhibitory factors in the immunopathology of RA. Several other proteins involved in the negative regulation of NF-kappaB-dependent inflammatory responses, such as MyD88s, IRAK-M, and TOLLIP, have been described (reviewed in [33]). These proteins are not discussed here, since a link with RA pathology has not yet been reported.Although IKK1 is a critical component of the non-canonical NF-kappaB pathway, it should be mentioned that this kinase also plays a prominent role in the negative regulation of both canonical and noncanonical NF-kappaB pathways. Macrophages from IKK1-deficient mice or knockin mice expressing inactive IKK1 show increased production of proinflammatory cytokines as a result of enhanced IKK2 activation and IkappaBalpha degradation [34]. IKK1 has also been shown to inhibit nuclear NF-kappaB and to downregulate proinflammatory signalling by phosphorylating STAT1 [35]. Interestingly, a recent study has demonstrated that IKK1 phosphorylates NIK in negative feedback regulation of the noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway [36], supporting the idea that IKK1 plays important roles in terminating both canonical and noncanonical NF-kappaB pathways with possible implications for chronic inflammatory diseases like RA.