NF-kappaB proteins are sequestered in the cytoplasm as latent complexes by inhibitory proteins referred to as inhibitor of NF-kappaB (IkappaB) proteins, which prevent NF-kappaB nuclear translocation and DNA binding [19]. Whereas the majority of IkappaBs (IkappaBalpha, IkappaBbeta, IkappaBepsilon, p105 (also known as NF-kappaB1), p100 (also known as NF-kappaB2)) serve as inhibitors of NF-kappaB, IkappaBxi and Bcl-3 instead potentiate NF-kappaB transactivation in the nucleus. p100 and p105 are precursors of the p52 and p50 NF-kappaB subunits, respectively. There are two unique NF-kappaB signalling pathways, termed canonical (or classical) and noncanonical (or alternative) NF-kappaB pathways.
The canonical NF-kappaB pathway plays a major role in innate and adaptive immunity, and is triggered by many stimuli including proinflammatory cytokines (for example, TNF, IL-1), antigens, RANKL, and TLR ligands. NF-kappaB signalling initiated by different receptors requires the formation of proximal protein-protein interactions that are often receptor specific, but ultimately converge in the activation of the IkappaB kinase (IKK) complex, which mediates phosphorylation of the inhibitory IkappaB protein leading to its K48-polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome [20]. The IKK complex is comprised of the two catalytic subunits IKK1 and IKK2 (also known as IKKalpha and IKKbeta) and the regulatory subunit NF-kappaB essential modulator (NEMO - also known as IKKgamma) (Figure 1). Gene targeting experiments showed that IKK2 and NEMO, but not IKK1, are required for canonical NF-kappaB activation [21].
One of the best studied NF-kappaB signalling pathways is the TNF pathway. TNF stimulation results in the recruitment of TNF receptor-1-associated death domain (TRADD) protein and of receptor interacting protein 1 (RIP1), which function as adaptor proteins for the E3 ubiquitin ligases TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 2 and TRAF5, which in turn bind the E3 ubiquitin ligases cellular inhibitor of apoptosis (cIAP) 1 and cIAP2 (Figure 1). On TNF stimulation, TNF-receptor bound RIP1 is rapidly modified by K63-linked polyubiquitin chains. TRAF2/5 and cIAP1/2 are good candidates for RIP1 ubiquitination, but the specific role of each is still unclear. The polyubiquitin chains on RIP1 are believed to create a scaffold to recruit the IKK and TAK1 complex via the ubiquitin-binding proteins NEMO and TAB1/2, respectively. The recent identification of a distinct E2/E3 enzyme complex that modifies NEMO with linear polyubiquitin chains and is essential for TNF-activated NF-kappaB signalling adds further complexity [22]. The exact role of protein-anchored polyubiquitin chains remains unclear, as it was recently suggested that unanchored polyubiquitin chains can directly activate the TAK1 complex [23].
Similar signalling principles apply to other receptors. For example, TLR4 stimulation by lipopolysaccharide induces the recruitment of Toll/IL-1 receptor adaptor protein (also referred to as Mal) and TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM), which most probably serve as bridging factors to recruit myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) and TIR domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFNbeta (TRIF), respectively. MyD88 in turn recruits members of the IL-1R-associated kinase (IRAK) family and TRAF6, leading to oligomerisation and selfubiquitination of TRAF6 [24]. TRIF also recruits TRAF6 [25] and RIP1 [26] via a direct interaction. Both pathways then activate TAK1 and IKK in a ubiquitination-dependent manner similar to the TNF pathway (Figure 1).
The noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway can be activated by the lymphotoxin beta receptor, BAFF receptor, CD40, and RANK (Figure 2). In this pathway, p100 is processed by the proteasome to p52, which together with the RelB NF-kappaB subunit regulates a distinct set of target genes that control B-cell development, secondary lymphoid organ development, and osteoclastogenesis [27] The noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway is strictly dependent on IKK1, which is activated upon phosphorylation by NF-kappaB inducing kinase (NIK). NIK is predominantly regulated at the post-translational level and is present at extremely low levels in most cell types. In unstimulated cells, NIK occurs in a cytoplasmic complex with TRAF2, TRAF3, and cIAP1/2, which K48-polyubiquitinates NIK, leading to its continuous degradation by the proteasome. Receptor ligation has been shown not only to remove TRAF3 from this complex by recruiting it to the receptor, but also to attract TRAF2 and cIAP1/2, which are essential for subsequent TRAF3 degradation. All this contributes to releasing NIK from its constitutive degradation, resulting in NIK accumulation and IKK1 phosphorylation [28,29] (Figure 2).
It should be mentioned that CD40, lymphotoxin beta receptor and RANK mediate the activation of both canonical and noncanonical NF-kappaB signalling pathways. Upon binding of their ligand, CD40 and RANK interact with several TRAF members, including TRAF1, TRAF2, TRAF3, TRAF5, and TRAF6, and this leads to the proteolysis of both TRAF2 and TRAF3, which represents an important step in the activation of the noncanonical pathway as described above. Specific TRAF molecules are associated with overlapping and distinct CD40-mediated functions. For example, in B cells TRAF6 is required for CD40-mediated JNK activation and IL-6 production, while TRAF2 is required for activation of NF-kappaB, and TRAF3 serves as a negative regulator of CD40 signalling [30,31].