The p65 subunit of NF-kappaB inhibits COL1A1 gene transcription in human dermal and scleroderma fibroblasts through its recruitment on promoter by protein interaction with transcriptional activators (c-Krox, Sp1, and Sp3). 
Transcriptional mechanisms regulating type I collagen genes expression in physiopathological situations are not completely known. In this study, we have investigated the role of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) transcription factor on type I collagen expression in adult normal human (ANF) and scleroderma (SF) fibroblasts. We demonstrated that NF-kappaB, a master transcription factor playing a major role in immune response/apoptosis, down-regulates COL1A1 expression by a transcriptional control involving the -112/-61 bp sequence. This 51-bp region mediates the action of two zinc fingers, Sp1 (specific protein-1) and Sp3, acting as trans-activators of type I collagen expression in ANF and SF. Knockdown of each one of these trans factors by siRNA confirmed the trans-activating effect of Sp1/Sp3 and the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB trans-inhibiting effect on COL1A1 expression. Despite no existing kappaB consensus sequence in the COL1A1 promoter, we found that Sp1/Sp3/c-Krox and NF-kappaB bind and/or are recruited on the proximal promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Attempts to elucidate whether interactions between Sp1/Sp3/c-Krox and p65 are necessary to mediate the NF-kappaB inhibitory effect on COL1A1 in ANF and SF were carried out; in this regard, immunoprecipitation assays revealed that they interact, and this was validated by re-ChIP. Finally, the knockdown of Sp1/Sp3/c-Krox prevents the p65 inhibitory effect on COL1A1 transcription in ANF, whereas only the siRNAs targeting Sp3 and c-Krox provoked the same effect in SF, suggesting that particular interactions are characteristic of the scleroderma phenotype. In conclusion, our findings highlight a new mechanism for COL1A1 transcriptional regulation by NF-kappaB, and these data could allow the development of new antifibrotic strategies.
