Human neuron-committed teratocarcinoma NT2 cell line has abnormal ND10 structures and is poorly infected by herpes simplex virus type 1. 
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early regulatory protein ICP0 stimulates the initiation of lytic infection and reactivation from quiescence in human fibroblast cells. These functions correlate with its ability to localize to and disrupt centromeres and specific subnuclear structures known as ND10, PML nuclear bodies, or promyelocytic oncogenic domains. Since the natural site of herpesvirus latency is in neurons, we investigated the status of ND10 and centromeres in uninfected and infected human cells with neuronal characteristics. We found that NT2 cells, a neuronally committed human teratocarcinoma cell line, have abnormal ND10 characterized by low expression of the major ND10 component PML and no detectable expression of another major ND10 antigen, Sp100. In addition, PML is less extensively modified by the ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1 in NT2 cells compared to fibroblasts. After treatment with retinoic acid, NT2 cells differentiate into neuron-like hNT cells which express very high levels of both PML and Sp100. Infection of both NT2 and hNT cells by HSV-1 was poor compared to human fibroblasts, and after low-multiplicity infection yields of virus were reduced by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude. ICP0-deficient mutants were also disabled in the neuron-related cell lines, and cells quiescently infected with an ICP0-null virus could be established. These results correlated with less-efficient disruption of ND10 and centromeres induced by ICP0 in NT2 and hNT cells. Furthermore, the ability of ICP0 to activate gene expression in transfection assays in NT2 cells was poor compared to Vero cells. These results suggest that a contributory factor in the reduced HSV-1 replication in the neuron-related cells is inefficient ICP0 function; it is possible that this is pertinent to the establishment of latent infection in neurons in vivo.
