Insights into the Regulation of TNF-alpha Production in Human Mononuclear Cells: The Effects of Non-Specific Phosphodiesterase Inhibition
OBJECTIVE
The objective of this study was to determine the effect of nonspecific phosphodiesterase inhibition on transcription factor activation and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) production in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated human mononuclear cells.
INTRODUCTION
The production of TNF-alpha following LPS stimulation is one of the key steps in bacterial sepsis and inflammation. The mechanism by which phosphodiesterase inhibition alters TNF-alpha production in the presence of LPS remains unclear.
METHODS
Human mononuclear cells were stimulated with LPS (1 mug/mL), in the presence and absence of Pentoxifylline (PTX; 20 mM), a nonspecific phosphodiesterase inhibitor. Western blotting of phosphorylated cytoplasmic I-kappaBalpha, nuclear factor-kappaB p65 (NF-kappaB), and nuclear cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) was performed. DNA binding of NF-kappaB and CREB was verified by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. TNF-alpha levels were determined in the supernatant of stimulated cells in the presence and absence Protein kinase A inhibition by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS
PTX was demonstrated to significantly reduce cytoplasmic I-kappaBalpha phosphorylation, nuclear p65 phosphorylation, and the DNA binding activity of NF-kappaB. In contrast, PTX markedly enhanced the phosphorylation and DNA binding activity of CREB. Cells concomitantly treated with PTX and LPS secreted similar levels of TNF-alpha in the presence and absence Protein kinase A inhibition.
DISCUSSION
The increased level of cAMP that results from phosphodiesterase inhibition affects cytoplasmic and nuclear events, resulting in the attenuation of NF-kappaB and the activation of CREB transcriptional DNA binding through pathways that are partially Protein kinase A-independent.
CONCLUSION
PTX-mediated phosphodiesterase inhibition occurs partially through a Protein kinase A-independent pathway and may serve as a useful tool in the attenuation of LPS-induced inflammation.