IKK recruitment to the CD40 signaling complex is defective in HOIP-deficient cells.
(A) SMAC peptide treatment reduces recruitment of cIAP1 to CD40 and may modify HOIP recruitment. A20.2J cells were incubated for six hours with membrane-permeable SMAC-N7 peptide or 1.5% DMSO (solvent used for the peptide). Following the incubation, cell lysates were prepared, fractionated by SDS-PAGE, and evaluated by Western blot (lanes 1 and 2). Cells incubated with DMSO or SMAC-N7 were also stimulated with magnetic beads coated with anti-CD40 or an isotype control antibody. Immunoprecipitated (IP) material bound to the beads was loaded in lanes 3-5. Samples of the cell lysates after immunoprecipitation appear in lanes 6-8. Western blots were probed with antibodies specific for cIAP1, TRAF2, TRAF3, and HOIP (approximate molecular weights indicated on left). Similar results were obtained in two additional experiments. (B) CD40 was isolated by immunoprecipitation (as in (A)) from A20.2J cells and HOIP-deficient cells transduced with an empty retroviral vector (pMIP) or a retroviral vector encoding HOIP. Material immunoprecipitated with an isotype control antibody (isotype) or anti-CD40 antibody was examined by Western blotting for CD40, TRAF2, TRAF3, cIAP1, HOIP, IKKalpha/beta, and IKKgamma (right panels). HOIP expression was required for coprecipitation of IKK proteins with CD40. Cell lysates from unstimulated cells are shown in the left panels. Similar results were obtained in a second experiment and in two experiments with a second HOIP-deficient clone. (C) To further evaluate HOIP-dependent recruitment of IKKgamma to CD40, A20.2J cells or HOIP-deficient (HOIP-/-) A20.2J cells were transduced with an empty retroviral vector or a retroviral construct encoding BP epitope-tagged IKKgamma (noted in the figure as pMIP and IKKgamma, respectively). Lysates (lanes 1-3) and immunoprecipitation (IP) samples (lanes 4-11) from the cell lines were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and evaluated by Western blotting with antibodies to the BP tag (IKKgamma, upper panel) and TRAF2. The anti-CD40 IP sample in lane 11 was treated with lambda phosphatase; the sample in lane 10 was mock-treated. Protein samples (minus those treated with phosphatase) were also fractionated on a separate gel (lower acrylamide concentration) for the evaluation of TRAF3 and HOIP (bottom two panels). Similar results were obtained in two additional experiments.