RPS3 was previously demonstrated to function as an integral subunit conferring NF-kappaB regulatory specificity6. Here we sought to elucidate how NF-kappaB activation signaling triggers RPS3 to translocate and participate in NF-kappaB function in the nucleus. We demonstrate that IKKbeta-mediated RPS3 S209 phosphorylation represents a critical determinant in governing its nuclear import thus unveiling a novel mechanism behind NF-kappaB regulatory specificity. IKKbeta is the major kinase that phosphorylates IkappaBs in the classical NF-kappaB pathway, leading to their subsequent degradation40. Strikingly, RPS3 possesses not any consensus IKK motif; instead, S209 is centered in a consensus CK2 motif. The recent observation that human IKKbeta displayed CK2-like phosphorylation specificity29 coincides with our evidence that recombinant IKKbeta, but not IKKalpha, phosphorylated RPS3. We found this phosphorylation is a critical modulation for RPS3 nuclear translocation (via importin-alpha) and engagement in specific NF-kappaB transcription. CK2 was previously shown to phosphorylate p65 and to bind to and phosphorylate IKKbeta41-43, however, we ruled out the possibility that the IKKbeta-bound CK2 could account for the observed RPS3 phosphorylation because no CK2 was detected in the IKKbeta preparations used for the in vitro kinase assay. Because RPS3 only harbors the CK2 motif and not a traditional IKK motif, this RPS3 regulatory function could explain why IKK harbors the alternative substrate phosphorylation capability.
More importantly, our study has elucidated how RPS3 is biochemically integrated into NF-kappaB activation signaling in a manner that is pivotal for the pathogenesis of foodborne pathogen E. coli O157:H7. IKKbeta-mediated RPS3 S209 phosphorylation is a critical target modulated by this pathogen to subvert host NF-kappaB signaling. The bacterial effector NleH1 specifically binds to RPS3 once injected into host cells and profoundly suppresses NF-kappaB and its attendant protective immune responses9. Our data now show that NleH1 selectively inhibits RPS3 phosphorylation, thus retarding its nuclear translocation and subsequent NF-kappaB function, without altering other NF-kappaB signaling. Although NleH1 did not directly phosphorylate IKKbeta, its kinase activity was required to inhibit IKKbeta-mediated RPS3 S209 phosphorylation. Many bacteria pathogens have products that target key kinases to inactivate them in host cells, whereas E. coli O157:H7 employed NleH1 to steer the substrate specificity of IKKbeta thus specifically fine-tuning host NF-kappaB signaling. This could represent a novel strategy to fine-tune host NF-kappaB signaling that could be shared by other pathogens. These data provide new insights into the poorly understood action mechanism for most T3SS effectors.
NleH1 attenuates the transcription of RPS3-dependent, but not all, NF-kappaB target genes, in particular those genes associated with acute proinflammatory responses, including IL8 and TNF. In contrast, NleH1 does not block NF-kappaB p65 nuclear translocation, which suggests that certain p65-dependent but RPS3-independent NF-kappaB target genes might thus be beneficial for E. coli O157:H7 to replicate and disseminate in the host. By selectively inhibiting RPS3 and its attendant NF-kappaB function with NleH1, the pathogen achieves the ability to increase colonization and diarrhea yet limiting the mortality of the host. This seemingly paradoxical combination of effects make sense when one considers that increased bacterial load and diarrhea together with survival of the infected host would promote the spreading of the bacteria among a population of susceptible individuals. Such complex and paradoxical pathological effects that influence the spread of disease are often poorly understood at the molecular level. Our data elucidate how alterations in selective NF-kappaB function, achieved by impeding RPS3, but not altering p65 nuclear translocation, can influence specific cytokines that affect bacterial colonization, diarrhea diseases and mortality. It may be fruitful in attempting to understand other infectious and autoimmune diseases involving NF-kappaB to consider selective effects of subunits such as RPS3 in addition to global NF-kappaB inhibition.