This study reports a novel mechanism of NF-kappaB activation by the HIV-1 Tat transactivator. Based on the evidence that Tat enhanced the transcriptional activity of the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB (49,63,64), and physically interacted with the IkappaB-alpha repressor (50,51), we investigated the possibility that Tat could activate NF-kappaB via direct interaction with IkappaB-alpha and p65. To this end, the NF-kappaB activity was monitored in single round HIV-1 infection using RNA interference to silence the Tat expression. By this approach, we avoided the perpetuation of NF-kappaB activation signaling due to subsequent rounds of viral entry in cell culture propagation (30,31). Upon HIV-1 infection, the early NF-kappaB activation occurred concomitantly with IKK activation and IkappaB-alpha degradation in the absence of Tat. Soon after the shut off of IKK activity and new synthesis of IkappaB-alpha, the NF-kappaB activity was kept elevated in the presence of Tat, while it was down regulated upon silencing of the Tat gene. These findings indicate that in single round HIV-1 infection, Tat enhanced the NF-kappaB activity without affecting the IKK activity and the half-life of IkappaB-alpha. Similar kinetic of NF-kappaB activation occurred upon short-pulse of PMA in Tat-transfected HeLa cells, where Tat inhibited the post-activation turn off of NF-kappaB in presence of newly synthesized IkappaB-alpha.
The Tat-dependent activation of NF-kappaB correlated with the association of the viral protein with IkappaB-alpha, which interfered with the generation of the IkappaB-alpha/p65 complex. This evidence demonstrated that Tat competed for the binding of IkappaB-alpha to p65 and prevented the IkappaB-alpha repression of p65. As additional mechanism of NF-kappaB activation, Tat associated with p65 and increased the p65 binding affinity to the NF-kappaB enhancer; this evidence was obtained with recombinant proteins indicating that the stronger binding of p65 to DNA was a consequence of direct association with Tat, which likely caused a conformational change of p65. We also demonstrated that the Tat cysteine-rich sequence (C22,25,27) was involved in the binding to the RHD of p65 and NF-kappaB activation. Differently, the Tat arginine-rich sequence (R49,52,53,55,56,57) was required for the binding to the sixth ankyrin of IkappaB-alpha (50,51), and for releasing p65 from the IkappaB-alpha inhibition. Altogether these results demonstrated that Tat abolished the negative feedback regulation of NF-kappaB by hijacking the IkappaB-alpha repressor, shielding p65 from the IkappaB-alpha embrace, and enforcing the p65 binding to DNA.
Further evidence of Tat activation of NF-kappaB showed that wild-type Tat, and not the Tat mutants lacking the arginine- or cysteine-rich domains, up-regulated in vivo the expression of a number of NF-kappaB-responsive genes, including MIP-1alpha, CSF3, LTA, NFKBIA and TLR2. By ChIP analysis, we observed that Tat increased the recruitment of p65 to the NF-kappaB enhancers of the activated genes, and was recovered at the same sites. RNA interference of p65 abolished the Tat occupancy of the NF-kappaB enhancers indicating that the Tat binding to the NF-kappaB sites was mediated by p65. These results were consistent with the evidence that Tat displaced p65 from the binding to IkappaB-alpha (Figures 2D and 3C), and increased the p65 DNA binding affinity through association (Figure 4E and F). Thus, Tat likely increased the recruitment of p65 to the NF-kappaB-dependent promoters by associating with p65 and by interfering with the assembly of p65 with the repressor IkappaB-alpha.
Of interest, IkappaB-alpha was found associated to the NF-kappaB enhancers in absence of Tat, where it was displaced in presence of Tat. These results suggest a negative regulatory role of IkappaB-alpha in gene regulation through occupancy of specific promoters. Indeed, IkappaB-alpha was found associated with hystone deacetylases at the hes1 promoter, from where it was removed following TNF-alpha stimulation causing histone acetylation and hes1 transcriptional activation (65). A similar mechanism of gene regulation could apply to the NF-kappaB-dependent genes analysed in this study, where Tat could activate the gene expression by removing IkappaB-alpha and promoting the p65 loading (Figure 7).
The physiological relevance of Tat cross talk with NF-kappaB was demonstrated in the HIV-1 infection of human monocytes, where HIV-1-encoded Tat protein counteracted post-activation turn off of NF-kappaB, as shown by: (i) sustained NF-kappaB activity by Tat in presence of newly synthesized IkappaB-alpha; (ii) coimmunoprecipitation of Tat with IkappaB-alpha and p65; (iii) induction of MIP-1alpha expression dependent on Tat and p65; (iv) Tat occupancy of the MIP-1alpha NF-kappaB enhancer associated with increased recruitment of p65.
This study supports the pro-inflammatory action of Tat through physical interaction with p65 and IkappaB-alpha. Several inflammatory cytokines under the transcriptional control of NF-kappaB are hyper-expressed in HIV-1 infected individuals, including IL-6 (66,67), TNF-alpha (68), and MIP-1alpha (57-62,69-71). In the case of TNF-alpha and IL-6, Tat activated the cytokine expression by binding to the TAR-like stem loop of the 5' transcript, thus likely promoting the transcriptional elongation (33,37,47). Here, we have shown that the Tat-dependent transcriptional activation of a number of pro-inflammatory genes required the assembly of Tat with p65 at the NF-kappaB enhancer together with the displacement of IkappaB-alpha (Figure 5). Thus, in the set of distinct NF-kappaB-responsive genes, Tat acted as a component of the transcriptional initiation complex, which is consistent with previous reports on Tat promoting the transcription via DNA motifs (72,73).
Overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines is considered a major mechanism of immune deregulation (26) and neuron dysfunction in AIDS (74,75). In this scenario, inhibition of NF-kappaB activity could lead to a therapeutic strategy for counteracting the abnormal production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in HIV-1 infection. NF-kappaB inhibitors, such as anti-oxidants, proteasome and IKK inhibitors, significantly reduced the HIV-1 replication and the associated inflammatory response (76,77); however, these NF-kappaB inhibitors acted indiscriminately in both HIV-1-infected and uninfected cells. The evidence that Tat activates NF-kappaB through direct interaction with IkappaB-alpha and p65 may lead to specific inhibitors to counteract the Tat pro-inflammatory action.