The exposure of inflammatory cells to a variety of extracellular stimuli results in the initiation of transcriptional and posttranscriptional events, which culminate in the production of pro-inflammatory mediators.11-14 TNF-alpha is released very early following shock and is considered an important mediator of the inflammatory cascade, since it regulates the synthesis of several other critical cytokines and chemokines.15 A clear relationship between increased TNF-alpha synthesis and the development of shock and multiple organ dysfunction has been observed in animal models of sepsis.15-17
Because of its importance in orchestrating multiple steps of the inflammatory response, strategies aimed at decreasing TNF-alpha levels or attenuating its production seem attractive. PDE inhibitors have been shown to downregulate TNF-alpha production in distinct human cell populations. We have previously shown that, in general, TNF-alpha levels continue to increase after LPS exposure and that concomitant infusion of phosphodiesterase inhibitors can markedly decrease TNF-alpha levels.18-19 In this in vitro study, we verified the sustained attenuation of LPS-induced TNF-alpha expression over time in an isolated human mononuclear cell population.
The mechanisms by which PTX, a non-specific phosphodiesterase inhibitor, significantly and consistently decreases TNF-alpha production have not been completely elucidated. It has been postulated that drugs that increase intracellular cAMP exert their anti-inflammatory effects through the activation of PKA. This classic pathway has been challenged as the sole mechanism involved in the modulation of inflammation by cAMP-enhancing drugs, and alternative mechanisms involving PKA-independent pathways have been proposed.6-8 In this series of experiments, we observed a significant attenuation of TNF-alpha production in LPS-stimulated human mononuclear cells following PTX administration, independent of PKA activation.
We used a nonspecific phosphodiesterase inhibitor, PTX, in the present study because it has been used clinically in the treatment of a variety of conditions in which inflammation is an important component of the pathophysiology of the disease process.19 Additionally, the use of PTX in sepsis as an adjunct to other treatments to maintain adequate organ function has been explored based upon its effects on TNF-alpha synthesis. However, the reported beneficial effects of PTX are not only related to the downregulation of TNF-alphabut also to PTX's hemorrheologic properties, its ability to reduce neutrophil activation, and its beneficial effects on microcirculation, cardiac performance, and organ injury.20-25 Herein, we demonstrated that the downregulatory effects of PTX in human mononuclear cells involves modulation of pathways that involve NF-kappaB and CREB, two major transcription factors involved in the inflammatory cascade.
NF-kappaB/Rel constitutes a family of transcriptional factors involved in the regulation of numerous cytokine genes and immune responses in different cell populations. The most abundant form of NF-kappaB is the p50-p65 heterodimer.26 The inactive form of NF-kappaB exists in the cytoplasm bound to an inhibitory complex containing I-kappaBalpha. Following cellular stimulation with LPS and chemotactic factors, NF-kappaB inducible kinase phosphorylates and activates the I-kappaB kinase (IKK) complex consisting of IKK-1 and IKK-2, which in turn phosphorylates the I-kappaBalpha subunit. Phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and subsequent degradation of I-kappaBalpha results in NF-kappaB nuclear translocation. This allows the transcription factor to bind to promoter regions of specific pro-inflammatory genes and influence transcription.27,28 Because a number of potential kappaB sites are present in the nucleotide sequences of the TNF-alpha gene, NF-kappaB is considered to be a critical transcriptional factor involved in TNF-alpha gene expression and protein synthesis.29,30
In this set of experiments, we demonstrated that PTX downregulates cytoplasmic I-kappaBalpha phosphorylation, nuclear NF-kappaB p65 phosphorylation/translocation, as well as NF-kappaB DNA-binding after LPS stimulation, suggesting that PTX exerts its function proximal to or at the level of I-kappaBalpha phosphorylation.
Previous studies that have evaluated the effects of cAMP-elevating drugs on I-kappaBalpha and NF-kappaB have reported conflicting results. Haddad et al. reported results similar to ours with respect to the effects of PTX on I-kappaBalpha and NF-kappaB in pulmonary epithelial cells.31 Conversely, Neumann et al. proposed that increased intracellular cAMP stabilizes the interaction between I-kappaBalpha and NF-kappaB, therefore reducing NF-kappaB activation.32 In contrast, Takahashi et al. showed no difference in I-kappaBalpha degradation in Jurkat T-lymphocytes in the presence and absence of forskolin, an alternative cAMP inducing compound. This group also demonstrated that forskolin did not inhibit the DNA-binding activity of NF-kappaB and that CREB was not involved in forskolin-induced decrease in p65 transcriptional activity.33 Similar results were reported by Ollivier et al. using THP-1 cells and endothelial cells treated with forskolin or dibutyryl cAMP, two agents known to function through cAMP elevation and subsequent PKA activation.9 The differences between our results and those mentioned above may be explained by the use of different cell types and exogenous stimulants. It is also possible that PTX exerts its anti-inflammatory effects on the NF-kappaB pathway independent of PKA, as suggested by the continued attenuation of LPS-induced TNF-alpha production by PTX in the presence or absence of PKA inhibition observed in this study. This hypothesis is currently under investigation in our laboratory. Furthermore, we utilized a broad PKA inhibitor in this study in addition to H89, but did not examine the effect of specific inhibition of various PKA isoforms. This information may yield more insight into the mechanism by which PTX exerts its down-regulatory effects.
PDE inhibitors may also downregulate NF-kappaB transcriptional activity by altering the competitive binding of CREB and NF-kappaB to the promoter regions of pro-inflammatory genes. Herein, we showed that the activation and DNA binding activity of CREB is upregulated in a dose-dependent manner by PTX. Of note, the increase in CREB activity was slightly alleviated by the addition of LPS, suggesting competition between PTX-induced CREB-associated gene transcription and those factors, such as NF-kappaB, which may be upregulated by LPS exposure. This competition has been postulated to involve the recruitment of the co-activator CBP and its homologue p30034, suggesting an alternative mechanism that may be involved in the anti-inflammatory actions of PTX. Future studies are planned to delineate the validity of this potential mechanism.
The effects of PTX on other transcription factors, such as AP-1, c-fos, and c-jun, cannot be ruled out by our experiments. Activation of AP-1 and its components (c-fos and c-jun) by agents that enhance mononuclear cell activity has been implicated in TNF-alpha expression. Moreover, AP-1 and CREB recognize a similar DNA binding sequence in the promoter region of the TNF-alpha gene35. Given these relationships, it is conceivable that PTX may exert some of its anti-inflammatory actions by affecting AP-1 activation and favoring CREB binding, thus inhibiting TNF-alpha gene transcription. Additional studies are necessary to elucidate the complex interactions between CREB, NF-kappaB, and AP-1 following LPS exposure and PDE inhibition. Furthermore, the effect of PTX on the cGMP pathway after LPS stimulation has not been explored, although we plan to do so in the future.
In summary, we have demonstrated that PDE inhibition of human mononuclear cells downregulates TNF-alpha production, at least in part, through a PKA-independent mechanism. In addition, PTX attenuates the activity of NF-B while upregulating CREB activation after LPS stimulation, which may result in modulation of pro-inflammatory mediator synthesis. Therefore, PTX may serve as a potential adjunct therapeutic for the treatment of conditions in which TNF-alpha production plays a significant role.