The bacterial membrane component lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is capable of initiating phosphorylation and activation of multiple host intracellular protein kinases and transcription factors. Transcription factor activation, which results in the modulation of gene transcription and protein synthesis, is a critical element in the defense mechanism of the host immune system.1,2
LPS-induced transcription factor activation has been shown to be a key regulator of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) production.3 TNF-alpha is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine involved in a wide spectrum of cellular responses. Furthermore, TNF-alpha synthesis can be attenuated in immune cells exposed to phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibition after challenge by a variety of pro-inflammatory stimulants.4 The signaling mechanisms affected by PDE inhibition, which ultimately lead to the downregulation of TNF-alpha production, have not been well characterized in inflammatory cells.
Classically, it has been demonstrated that PDE inhibition results in the intracellular accumulation of the second messenger cyclic adenosine-3,5-monophosphate (cAMP) and subsequent activation of Protein kinase A (PKA).5 PKA activation then leads to the phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), transmission of signals into the nucleus, and the subsequent modulation of gene transcription.6 This apparently simple linear cascade does not fully explain the mechanism by which an elevation in the intracellular cAMP level exerts wide-ranging effects on multiple cellular functions. There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that cAMP may function through both PKA-dependent and -independent mechanisms.6-8
LPS-induced activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) has also been the focus of a great deal of research. It has been clearly demonstrated that agents that increase intracellular cAMP also inhibit NF-kappaB-dependent pro-inflammatory gene transcription, particularly of the TNF-alpha gene.9
Controversy exists regarding the exact mechanism(s) by which PDE inhibition down-regulates TNF-alpha production. Possibilities include, but are not limited to, inhibition of NF-kappaB DNA binding activity, downregulation of NF-kappaB transcriptional activity, increased CREB activation, and competition between NF-kappaB and CREB for common co-activators such as CREB binding protein (CBP). It is also not known whether these processes rely solely upon the activation of PKA.
Therefore, the objective of the present study is to determine the effects of nonspecific PDE inhibition with 1-[5-oxohexyl]-3,7-dimethylxanthine (Pentoxifylline; PTX) on NF-kappaB and CREB activation in vitro in human mononuclear cells. With the use of specific inhibitors, we also investigated the role of PKA in LPS-induced TNF-alpha production.